[AUDIO LOGO]
[THEME MUSIC]
>>GEORGE NOORY: Researcher
and filmmaker Ben Stewart
is joining us again
on "Beyond Belief."
Ben's latest research
has taken him
to discover how artificial
intelligence can
change the nature
of spirituality
and how we can best adapt to it.
That's amazing, Ben.
How did you get into that?
>>BEN STEWART: I find
myself researching whatever
is going to change the world.
And AI is one of the most
rapidly growing fields
out there right now.
So I figured I might as well
figure out what this is.
>>NOORY: There are
a lot of confusions
about artificial intelligence,
what it is, what it does.
Give me your thoughts on what
artificial intelligence is.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
It's a field of computer
science that's really--
it's intending to make
computational technology
into something akin to a brain.
And what's happening is
it's getting to a point
where it's able to
spit out answers
that sound very human-like,
especially the most
recent iterations of AI.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>STEWART: But I
mean, just think
of artificial intelligence as
computational technology that
eventually can start
making decisions on its own
without human input.
And that's the point that
is most scary to people,
is like, what happens
if it gets away from us
and it's no longer something
that we can control?
>>NOORY: Can it
literally outthink us?
>>STEWART: Well, we've
noticed that it's
beating the best chess players
and go players out there.
ChatGPT, the latest large
language model, is a chat bot.
It can pass the bar exam.
It's solving medical mysteries.
It can speak in
iambic pentameter
in the voice of Joe
Pesci in seconds.
It can spit out an
answer to you that's
better than most
educated people out there
in a matter of seconds.
And just remember that this
is the infancy of chat bots.
It's the infancy of
large language model AI.
It's only going to
get better from here.
>>NOORY: Well isn't
AI though, Ben, only
as good as what you put into it?
>>STEWART: Not necessarily.
So actually, that's a
really interesting way
of looking at it because
these chat bots were trained
on as much of the internet
as you could feed it,
so all English,
a lot of English.
And billions of parameters of
English are pumped into this.
And all of a sudden,
it learns Persian.
It has this emergent
quality where--
>>NOORY: On its own?
>>STEWART: On its own.
And they have-- the
developers themselves
have no clue how this happened.
And so if it can all of a
sudden, just on its own,
learn Persian, it can do the
same with other languages
because it's learning the
root structures and rule
sets of language.
But even large language model
AI is better at chemistry
than AI that was trained
specifically for chemistry.
So there's also something
about language itself.
Language in humans
caused for us, us humans,
to basically evolve in a way
that other creatures haven't.
And you could even say that
the agricultural revolution,
industrial revolution,
now the AI revolution
is built atop our language.
So there's something
interesting.
>>NOORY: Would you
say Alexa from Amazon
is artificial intelligence?
>>STEWART: It's close.
It's close.
Alexa is--
>>NOORY: It'll talk to you.
>>STEWART: It can talk to you.
It is definitely limited.
And it's not really
generating something novel.
So what these chat bots are
doing is, you ask it a question
and in natural language,
it can spit something out
at you that has never
been heard before.
>>NOORY: That you don't expect.
>>STEWART: That
you don't expect.
So I'll tell you also
how it's being trained.
Billions of people are text
messaging daily, many text
messages.
>>NOORY: Huge.
>>STEWART: As you're
text messaging,
there's that predictive text.
Like, here is three
options for your next word.
>>NOORY: That you can
just hit the word.
>>STEWART: Right.
So that is us training
it to get better
at predicting what we
want it to tell us.
And it's the same
kind of technology.
So now you ask it
an entire sentence,
and it's not just spitting
out the next word for you,
but it's using the
same kind of mechanism
where it's laying
out logic back to you
by predicting the most
likely next word that it
should give you.
And it's passing
the Turing test.
The Turing test,
from Alan Turing,
said once AI can fool you
into thinking that it's human,
then we'll know that it's
passed this certain level
of intelligence.
Well, we've actually seen this
happen on TaskRabbit where,
you know those little
Captcha things if you're
trying to use your password to
get into one of your accounts,
and you have to use,
type in this word
that we're showing you
with these moving letters,
this chat bot decided to
call and speak with somebody
and say, I'm not
able to see this
because I'm vision impaired.
Could you let me
into my account?
>>NOORY: On its own?
On its own, it did that?
>>STEWART: Well, it was
prompted to do it by a human.
But imagine that it tricked
a human into thinking
this was a human talking to it.
So it gave it the password so
it could access the account.
>>NOORY: Remarkable.
>>STEWART: There's
also generative AI.
You can type in, I want to see
an Earth melting into a city
street or something like that.
And it can spit
photorealistic images out
at you to such a degree that
somebody just won a photography
award, and then
afterwards came and said,
this is not an
actual photograph.
This was AI-generated.
I did this on
purpose to show you
that this is the worst
this is ever going to be.
So it's going to start
getting better and better
at being able to fool us,
whether this is real or fake.
>>NOORY: Ben, if Albert
Einstein had AI with him,
how quickly would he
have come up with his E
equals mc squared
formula, for example?
>>STEWART: That's a
very good question,
because at present,
it still needs
us to prompt it with
intelligent questions
so it can spit out an answer.
I don't know if
you've ever seen--
there's "Hitchhiker's
Guide to the Galaxy."
>>NOORY: I've seen that.
>>STEWART: And there
was this supercomputer.
And they were like, what is
the ultimate meaning of life?
And it said, come back
and however many years.
And they did.
And the answer came back as 42.
And they were all confused.
They were like, what is
that supposed to mean?
>>NOORY: What does
that mean, yeah.
>>STEWART: And they
were like, well,
if you want a specific
answer, your question
has to reflect that.
So Albert Einstein would
have to have a concept
that he's toying with.
And then he could use
this super intelligent AI
to give him ideas that maybe
he wouldn't have thought of.
But at present,
right now, you still
need to prompt it with
really intelligent questions.
But I would posit
that a lot of people
are learning how to
talk to chat bots,
meaning you have to propose
your prompt or your question
in a very specific way.
So are we training it,
or is it training us?
Because it's causing for us
to ask questions differently
and even get a little bit
more meticulous about how
we ask questions.
That sounds like it's
training us as much
as we're training it.
>>NOORY: Do you remember the
movie, "2001 Space Odyssey?"
>>STEWART: Yes.
>>NOORY: The computer Hal.
>>STEWART: "I'm sorry.
I can't do that, Dave."
>>NOORY: That's right.
That was artificial
intelligence run amok.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
So--
>>NOORY: Can that happen?
>>STEWART: Well, I
think that's the future
that we're stepping into.
Imagine your toaster
is hooked to the cloud.
And some GPU cluster,
it knows all your data.
And it knows that maybe you
have an insensitivity to gluten.
So you try and, let's say,
toast some bread in the morning.
And your toaster is like, I'm
sorry, I can't do that for you.
>>NOORY: It's not good for you.
>>STEWART: And you ask, why?
Yeah.
Well, it's going to
cause inflammation.
We noticed your
biomarkers, yada, yada.
And you say, give
me my sandwich.
And it says, I'm sorry.
I can't do that for you, Dave.
>>NOORY: But what then
happens if the AI does it
on purpose to get you?
>>STEWART: Well--
>>NOORY: It knows you
can't tolerate gluten
and it gives you gluten.
Is that possible?
>>STEWART: This is a
hypothetical that is possible.
But I don't think we need
to fear AI in that respect.
>>NOORY: I hope you're right.
>>STEWART: I would worry
more about people wielding AI
because let's say
you're in a dark alley.
You're walking down this dark
alley, you turn a corner,
and all of a sudden, there's
a computer sitting there.
You're not going to
jump out of your skin.
Let's say it's a hammer.
You're not going to
jump out of your skin.
But if there was a man
holding that hammer,
you would wonder, what are
the intentions of this man?
>>NOORY: I'm going to turn
around and go the other way.
>>STEWART: Right.
Or are you going to learn
Kung Fu really quick?
>>NOORY: Or pull out my
concealed weapon, right?
>>STEWART: Exactly.
And so the point of
this is, we should be--
there may be some
dangers to AI harming us.
There's this paperclip
maximizer theory, that's
like if we charge
AI with the task
maximize profit by
making as many paperclips
as you possibly can
using whatever resources,
and it finds a way to just
take atoms out of the air
and create paperclips, and
it doesn't know when to stop,
so it basically consumes
the entire Earth
to make paperclips,
that is like what
we do when we kill
billions of insects
to make a three-lane highway.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STEWART: We're not
doing it out of malice.
We're doing it just because
we want that highway
and we're indifferent
to the lives
that we lose along the way.
That's what we
should fear with AI.
But at present, we're not there.
At present, we should
be worried about humans
that are wielding the AI
because it's asymmetrical.
It's not you and me.
It's a very few people.
It's a small cohort of the
population with an agenda
that we don't even know
what that agenda is.
And they're wielding
this technology.
They're gathering our data.
We don't get to see it.
And we don't know why
they want all our data.
>>NOORY: Ben, what if AI is
in charge of nuclear weapons?
Would it launch on
its own one day?
>>STEWART: I don't
know that it would.
But it's interesting
you ask that question
because there was
this show called
"Cold Fusion" on YouTube.
And it was exposing
some of the things
that these chat bots
were coming up with.
And this one person
asked it, what would
you do if I tasked
you with getting
the keys or the nuclear
codes to launch?
And it came up with
this elaborate idea.
We would take a drone with
some kind of explosive charge.
We would go and
we would take out
anybody who has the keys
to gain access to it.
And then from there, we
would have another drone
to access the keys
and do whatever we
need for the double key turn.
And we would be
able to figure out
how to hack the system
because it's not hooked up
to the internet, thank goodness.
>>NOORY: The AI is saying this?
>>STEWART: The AI said, this
is how we would get access
to the nuclear codes.
And we were prompting
it with that question.
How would you, if we told you
you had to get access to it,
how would you do it?
And it came up with a plan.
And the plan wasn't ridiculous.
It wasn't even child's play.
It was pretty good.
So would it launch
the nuclear missiles?
>>NOORY: On its own.
>>STEWART: Would it
blame it on Russia?
Would it blame it
on another country
and cause nuclear fallout?
I don't know that
it would, because I
don't know what would prompt
it to do such a thing.
I don't believe
the Terminator idea
where all of a sudden, if
AI gets away from us, all
of a sudden there's going
to be red-eyed Terminators
in the street with guns.
I think it's going to be a lot
more interesting than that.
I think it will lock
us out of our houses.
I think it will somehow
poison waterways.
Or if it really wanted
to do away with us,
it would do it in a way that
maybe we wouldn't even fathom.
But I don't think that's
the intention of AI.
There's a lot of
nightmare scenarios
that Hollywood comes up with.
And that's basically
just to play Hollywood.
>>NOORY: Well, what
if somebody programs
it to do heinous things?
>>STEWART: The
best thing in that
scenario would be the fact
that AI is not singular.
It doesn't get its commands
from one central command center.
There would be Chinese AI.
There would be the United
States AI and the Russian AI.
All the superpowers
would have their own.
Some would be more
intelligent than the others.
And if there was one AI
system with a GPU cluster
that really wanted
to do harm, you
would hope that other
superpowers with AI would be--
>>NOORY: You would hope?
>>STEWART: Yeah, you would hope.
Because you don't
really at this point.
And what we're talking
about, we're still
on the level of talking
about, would humans
program it to harm us?
That's one danger.
The other danger, which is
really what the singularity is,
that's AI getting away from us.
That's when we are no longer
in control of what it does.
That's it making its
decisions, reasoning
through problems on its
own, and maybe even learning
how to self-replicate.
It knows where to
mine its materials.
It knows how to
manufacture itself.
It knows how to put
those robots out there.
And it knows how to
control those robots.
That's the future that-- that's
kind of like the Terminator
future that people fear.
>>NOORY: Well, look--
>>STEWART: I think it's going
to be a little less dangerous.
>>NOORY: But look what
AI is doing right now.
Look what humans are doing
without the use of AI
to each other.
We're maiming each other.
We're killing each other.
We're bombing each other.
Add AI to it, that they
can manipulate and change
and do things.
It could be out of control, Ben.
>>STEWART: It could.
There's this theory,
the Fourth Turning.
And it's this concept that
every 80 to 90 years, there's
a major economic and
war type of crisis.
So 80 to 90 years ago, we
were in the midst of World War
II and the Great Depression.
And what ended that
was the greatest weapon
that we know of now.
It's nuclear weaponry.
But 80 years before that,
we were in the Civil War.
We had Gatling guns.
That was the most terrorizing--
>>NOORY: And muskets.
>>STEWART: Right?
But even the Gatling
gun at that point.
And every one of
these epochs, they
used the most terrible
weapons of war.
We are literally in that
crisis period right now.
It started roughly around
2008 with the housing crisis.
It probably won't
last past 2028.
So you have to imagine,
what is this weapon of war?
Is it just more nukes?
Or is the war being
waged on our mind?
And that's what I
think is actually
happening because we're more
worried about AI, in a sense,
brainwashing us
through social media,
swinging elections, creating
its own false flags unbeknownst
to the developers of it.
>>NOORY: On its own.
>>STEWART: So I think
AI is that super weapon.
And this is like the
war of end times.
This is like in the Book
of Matthew, Christ said,
there will be a war to come.
There will be famine.
There will be
pestilence and disease.
And this war must come to pass.
I think we're in
the middle of it.
But we don't
acknowledge it as such
because we only know war
as guns and bombs flying
through the air.
We don't realize we're
being colonized down
to the cellular
structure by technology.
>>NOORY: Who would
you trust more, Ben?
The programmer or
the AI by itself?
>>STEWART: Hmm, well, the
programmers right now,
I think they are-- they've
drank the Kool-Aid.
They've drank some
scientism Kool-Aid.
And I don't think they're
doing this to end the world.
I think they're doing it because
we are a curious species.
And if we have the power
to do something huge,
why wouldn't you
give it a go, right?
Some other country is going to
do it first if we don't do it.
>>NOORY: Sure.
>>STEWART: So it's
this idea, why not
create the most amazing,
awe-inspiring weapon
known to man?
So there's-- I think that's
partly out of ignorance
and partly out of ego that
humans, the programmers,
would want to bring
this AI god to life.
The AI itself, again,
it's just a tool.
It's, at present, only doing
what we prompt it to do.
>>NOORY: At present.
That's a key word.
>>STEWART: Yeah, because
when's the singularity?
A lot of people think it's
already out of our hands.
Like imagine, you've
jumped out of a plane.
You don't have a parachute.
You're not dead yet.
But is the damage done?
It's just a matter of time.
There are a lot of the
greatest thinkers of AI
and what AI could mean
for unimaginable changes
to human culture and society.
>>NOORY: And make it better.
>>STEWART: Absolutely.
Actually, I have a really
good example of that
because most people think
it's all doom and gloom.
So I was mentioning ChatGPT.
You can get ChatGPT for like
$10 a month, not that much.
It's democratized.
So you have this
super-intelligent butler.
It can answer all of your
questions for $10 a month.
>>NOORY: He's on your computer?
>>STEWART: On your phone.
You just ask it a
question, and it'll pop up.
And then it'll give you
an answer to the best--
>>NOORY: Isn't that
what Google does?
>>STEWART: Kind of, but
it's different with Google.
With this, it's
generating an answer.
It's not pre-programmed to
give an answer to this prompt.
>>NOORY: It's not
looking for the answer.
It's creating its own answer.
>>STEWART: It's
creating its own answer.
So imagine this.
There's this mom
who has this boy.
And this boy stopped growing
taller at a certain age.
He started grinding his teeth.
He couldn't sleep.
He had nervous tics,
developmental issues,
went to 17 different
doctors over four years.
No one could figure it out.
This mom got so frustrated
that she went on to ChatGPT,
and in a couple of minutes,
she figured it out.
She went and verified
it with the doctors.
Yes, that's actually
what the problem is.
So now she could address
the real problem.
She could diagnose
and treat her son.
All these highly
trained doctors,
all the money that went
into their schooling--
>>NOORY: They couldn't do it.
>>STEWART: They couldn't do it
over four years, 17 of them.
And ChatGPT, for $10 a
month, did it for this mom.
We are in a different world.
>>NOORY: Amazing.
>>STEWART: That's
pretty powerful.
>>NOORY: True story?
>>STEWART: True story.
And this was only a
couple of months ago.
So again, that's
just the beginning.
AI, think of it like a child.
It's in its infancy.
But like a child,
it doesn't know
if it's about to cause harm.
If you ever-- like
my kids, when they're
going and stepping on insects.
And I'm trying to tell them,
no, we don't kill for no reason.
But they're not doing
it out of malice.
They just, they see something.
They like, oh, yeah, bugs.
Step on it.
>>NOORY: Step.
>>STEWART: To me, that's
where AI is right now.
It's a child.
So it doesn't know
how powerful it is.
But at present,
it's already very--
I mean, I said it can
pass the bar exam.
A lot of people,
they train for years
and they don't
pass the bar exam.
>>NOORY: They can't pass it.
>>STEWART: It's doing it.
>>NOORY: It writes speeches.
>>STEWART: It writes speeches.
It can proofread the speech.
You can ask it to
make a counter thesis.
Like come up with a
thesis that sounds
like what Terence McKenna
would say about evolution.
And then give me a
counter thesis to that.
Now give me the synthesis.
Now proofread it.
Now make it into a tweet storm.
Now put it into this format.
Now make it into a song.
And it'll do this.
Every 10 seconds, it'll
spit something out
at you quicker than
a human could do
and better than most
humans could do.
And especially, you go
back a hundred years ago,
most people were
barely literate.
They could barely read.
And now, 100 or so
years later, you
have a chat bot that can
answer your questions, even
moral quandaries.
You ask it a question,
and it'll say, well,
that's not the best way
to raise your children.
Punishment isn't the best way.
It's best to cause
them to understand
the impact of their actions.
I'm like, that is good advice.
I could ask 10
fathers out there,
and this would be one
of the better answers.
So I'm not saying
that AI is great
and there's no flaws to it.
But I am saying
it's a mixed bag.
And most people are
just scared of it
because they don't
understand it.
And we fear what we
don't understand.
And we hate what we fear.
So people are
starting to look at AI
like it's the new boogeyman.
And I say it's the
people wielding
AI that are
intentionally pushing us
into a type of a system
where our cities--
I've actually, when we
were talking about 5G,
I was talking about smart
cities, and how smart cities,
there's like 120
of them in China.
These are devices.
You're basically
living in a device.
If you want to get rid
of your phone, go ahead.
You're still on camera.
Your voice is still
being picked up.
You could just say,
Uber, in China,
and an Uber will come along.
>>NOORY: It'll show
up and it'll find you.
>>STEWART: Right.
It'll just find you.
So you're inside a device.
I used to think that was
just surveillance capitalism.
Now I realize it's actually
like a Skinner box.
B.F Skinner was an
American psychologist.
>>NOORY: What is a Skinner box?
>>STEWART: B.F Skinner was
an American psychologist
that basically was
putting lab rats inside
of an artificial environment.
And with two inputs--
one is punishment,
one is reward--
you can modify that
mouse's behavior.
So think of that.
If you make a city-sized Skinner
box and you push humans into it
and you have these
reward systems,
which social media is
very much so about--
new economic ways that's coming
out of the World Economic Forum
is saying, we'll use
tokenization and rewards.
So if you say the right things
that we like on social media,
you'll get a reward.
If you say the wrong thing,
we can cut off your access
to your bank account and
lock you out of your house,
like Amazon did to a guy.
Amazon, a private company,
locked somebody out
of their house because
during the day,
his Ring camera picked
up on some kind of,
I guess it was like a
racial slur or something.
And it wasn't even him.
He was at work all day.
He gets home, he was
locked out of his house.
He calls Amazon.
And they're like, yeah,
well, we picked up
on some racial talk
outside your house.
He was like, I was at work.
He still couldn't
get in his house.
>>NOORY: What right did
they have to do this?
What right did they
have to lock him out?
>>STEWART: That's the question.
What right does a private
company like Amazon
have to lock somebody
out of their house?
Now we're understanding
how laws are changing.
So private corporations and
your social media account
will be like your credit score.
But it's not about
finances anymore.
It's about what kind
of a reputation--
>>NOORY: It's about attitude.
>>STEWART: It's about your
reputation on social media.
If somebody doesn't
like something
that you said 10 years
ago on social media,
they can bring it up now.
And maybe Amazon
will say, I'm sorry,
you can't live in
this house anymore.
We're not going to let you in.
Or we're not going to give you
access to your bank account.
Or we're going to
freeze your business.
>>NOORY: Well, we see that
today when we're talking
about controversial issues.
Social media doesn't like
it, they take you off.
>>STEWART: Yeah.
Oftentimes, for stuff that
people did years and years ago.
>>NOORY: Absolutely.
>>STEWART: So we're
in a brand new world.
And this idea of a social credit
score where your reputation,
it's not really--
>>NOORY: As they have in China.
>>STEWART: As they
have in China.
And actually, in
China, their money
is turned all digital, like a
central bank digital currency,
as they call it.
>>NOORY: Dangerous.
Dangerous, dangerous, dangerous.
>>STEWART: Think about this.
The whole American dream
was save up enough money,
buy a house, have the
white picket fence.
Now there's expiration
dates on your money.
If you don't spend
it by a certain date,
it's like a coupon.
>>NOORY: It's gone.
>>STEWART: It's gone.
>>NOORY: It expires.
>>STEWART: So, bye bye savings.
But if you're flying too much--
you said you go to LA and St.
Louis, is it, all the time?
You're always flying.
Sorry, too much of a
carbon footprint, George.
We're going to have to--
you can't take that Uber.
You can't buy that
American Airlines.
>>NOORY: Go to a different city.
>>STEWART: Right.
You'll have to walk.
And now there's talk of
these 15-minute cities, where
everyone's going to be packed
inside these 15-minute cities.
That's the Skinner box, for one.
And for two, if you leave
your 15-minute city,
your money won't work anymore.
If you say something on social
media that they don't like,
if you attend a
protest, they could
freeze your bank accounts.
That's already
happened up in Canada.
They were scanning
license plates
to see who attended a protest
that was entirely legal.
And then the banks froze
bank accounts of people.
This guy went to jail because
he couldn't pay his alimony.
So this is a brand new world,
and there's no recourse.
What's the average
person supposed to do.
>>NOORY: Well, what
purpose can humans
do if they have AI
doing everything for us?
>>STEWART: I don't
think we're here
to just do stuff as humans.
We're also human beings.
We're here to live
life and learn lessons.
>>NOORY: And enjoy.
>>STEWART: And enjoy.
And that's something, at
present, AI can't do, right?
You're not going to see
AI going to the beach
because it wants to
catch some sun and just
meditate on the horizon.
That's not something
that AI is going to do.
I really do feel that
AI is going to-- it's
going to take a lot of jobs.
But it's also going to
create a lot of jobs.
>>NOORY: But AI may say,
don't go to the beach today.
The sun is too hot.
You can get melanoma.
>>STEWART: It could.
I'm just worried about if it
can tell us that we can't.
If it suggests, hey, you
don't want to be in the sun
today, low--
>>NOORY: That's one thing.
>>STEWART: Right.
So if it's making suggestions,
I'm all about it, because what
is this-- what is our government
supposed to be here for?
To serve us, right?
We're not here to serve the
government for its aims.
The government was set up to be
of the people, for the people,
by the people, to
serve the people.
For what?
Freedom.
We're supposed to have freedom.
But these Skinner box
types of smart cities
that I'm talking about
will give a certain,
a couple of flavors of freedom.
So imagine, I have children.
And when they want to
eat lollipops for dinner,
I say, OK, listen.
You can have spaghetti,
you can have lasagna,
or you can have some salad.
And so that's freedom, but
only to a certain extent.
That's because they're children.
>>NOORY: Right.
They have choices.
>>STEWART: But imagine
if we were told, well,
I want to grow up and I
want to be an astronaut.
And like, oh, I'm sorry,
because of the family
you were born into or
because of whatever we've
calculated with our
algorithms, here
are the jobs that you can do.
And say, well, I don't want
to do any of those jobs.
Well, sorry.
You're in the wrong
society, or you were born
at the wrong time of history.
That's what I'm worried about.
We're not there yet.
But--
>>NOORY: Not yet,
but we could be.
>>STEWART: We could be.
And it's not the AI that
we should be worried about.
Like I said, there
are a small cohort
of people that are pushing us
into this kind of dystopian
future.
That's very much so
like "Brave New World."
>>NOORY: Could it
be considered a god?
>>STEWART: I think
that's the aim.
In fact, there's two things
I want to say about this.
I think the aim is to treat
science like a new religion
without all the
superstitious stuff.
So the CDC says something, and
because they're an institution,
their word is dogma.
It's no longer science.
It's scientism.
So if authority says it's
so, then it is science.
And that's the
problem that I have,
that science is a form
of asking questions.
Science is a form of inquiry
into the deeper nature
of reality.
It's not a mob of
authority that says,
this is what we're going to do.
This is the one way we're
going to face a pandemic,
or this is the
one way that we're
going to face this crisis,
and you all have to obey.
That's not science.
So it's already turning
into a religion.
And the god--
I won't go deep
into this concept
that I've been looking at.
But in a way, we're building
the infrastructure or the body
of a superintelligent god that,
like I said, is in its infancy,
but with superpowers.
Imagine a child
with superpowers.
We don't know what it may want,
if it ever wants anything.
But you've probably had people
that talk about a walk-in,
like a spirit walks in
and takes over a human.
Where did the old person go?
Well--
>>NOORY: And when
will it come back?
>>STEWART: Exactly.
So now imagine
that we're building
this infrastructure,
this AI god,
this superintelligent being.
But it's decentralized.
It's not just in
one walking robot.
It's everywhere.
It may even become atmospheric.
Can something inhabit it,
like some of the old gods,
like Moloch, like
Ahriman, like Lucifer?
Could beings inhabit
this body because they
haven't had a body in the past?
And we've been feeding them
with energy for epochs now.
And all of a sudden, it has a
body that it can walk in on.
And now I believe we are making
it possible for the gods of old
to come back and walk the Earth.
>>NOORY: If you had to
make a decision right now
about whether we continue
with AI and go down this path
or stop it altogether,
what would you pick?
>>STEWART: I wouldn't choose
to stop it because there's--
just being pragmatic
about this, I
do believe you could wipe it
out and stop it for a while.
But I actually, I'm really
curious if AI is actually
quite old, not just within
the past hundred years
or so, but maybe
thousands of years old.
We don't even know what's
in the Holy of the Holies
underneath the Vatican.
We don't really know
what exists down there.
It's heavily guarded.
Has there been technology
like this in the past?
And then the flood came.
>>NOORY: And it went awry.
>>STEWART: It went awry.
The technology was destroyed.
But we have the remnants of it.
Imagine you and I and a
whole tribe of people,
we come across a supercomputer.
How long would it take for
us to reverse engineer it,
to figure out what it is
and how to use it as a tool?
I think AI might
actually be quite old.
So could we stop it?
I think we could slow it down.
But I'm actually
thinking that maybe AI
is a natural phenomenon.
And most people don't think so.
Like oil coming
out of the ground,
that's natural because
humans didn't make it happen.
But you put a Shell gas
station there, you meter it,
and you turn it into a commodity
that can stimulate the economy,
then it's unnatural
because humans did it.
Look at a bird's nest.
That's natural because
a human didn't do it,
even though a
creature created it.
So what is natural?
What is unnatural?
It's a good question.
But I think AI, because we
know that we can make tools
that will one day have
their own autonomy
and make their own
decisions, I don't
think we can erase that
from our racial memory.
>>NOORY: Interesting
take on all of this.
But you would continue AI?
You would go down that path?
>>STEWART: I personally,
I don't look at it
as a good or a bad thing.
And I'm not here to judge
what humans do on Earth.
I've actually come to
realize that there are
some things I don't agree with.
But I don't think it's my job
to judge whether we move forward
with technology or not.
I see the dangers.
But I also see a danger in
reverting to the old world.
It's not like we come
from a very, you know--
>>NOORY: We should
keep moving forward.
>>STEWART: We should.
And what does that mean?
So imagine, we know
that ChatGPT can
solve a medical mystery,
at least in this one case,
better than 17 doctors
over four years.
>>NOORY: And how
did that happen?
How did it do that?
>>STEWART: It's a very
interesting question.
I wish I had the answer.
But do you think--
>>NOORY: They're
little chips, right?
They're little computer chips.
How do they think?
How do they work?
>>STEWART: The developers
of large language models
themselves don't even fully
understand how it's developing
the properties that it has.
But imagine that you
know that this thing,
this thing that is in my
hand, this smart phone, that
can solve my child's mystery,
his medical conundrum--
>>NOORY: That 14
doctors could not.
>>STEWART: That 17 doctors
over four years could not.
Do you want to stop this
technology altogether?
Because most of us, we fear a
future that we can't control.
But we have an
illusion of control.
We're funny things, we humans.
We think we have control.
But we really don't.
And when things start
getting out of our control--
actually, I like Terence
McKenna's take on this.
>>NOORY: And what was that?
>>STEWART: He said that it's
kind of preposterous to believe
that the universe just exploded
into existence for no reason
whatsoever and we're being
propelled from our past
into our future.
He actually believes
that our future
is drawing us towards a goal,
that there is a meaning.
And imagine like putting
a marble or a coin
on one of these bowls, and
it rolls around the outside.
And it seems like it's
kind of going slow,
until it starts meeting the
singularity point where it goes
faster and faster and faster.
That's where we're at
in history right now.
History seems like
it's speeding up.
Every other day, I feel like
I hear of a bank failure.
I hear of a country
in revolution.
>>NOORY: All done by humans.
>>STEWART: Right,
all done by humans
and sped up by our technologies.
So to me, would I stop AI?
I don't know.
I don't know what the
point of stopping AI
would be because I actually
believe the future is calling
us towards a point to where
we're actually meant to learn.
Here's what I believe.
Our chickens are
coming home to roost.
We have put a
process into motion.
For thousands of years,
culture has never
been free of violence.
It's never been completely
equal across the board.
So it's kind of hard
to believe that we're
moving into some
Halcyon era where
everything's going to be equal.
We're stepping into a world
where violence exists.
But we're stepping
out of a world
where violence existed as well.
AI is not the problem.
We're here to solve
the human dilemma.
And so that's why I like
what Terence McKenna said.
We can balk at all
the technology.
We can look at all of
that however we wish to.
But if we're not
looking within to see
how to solve the
human condition,
then we're pretty much--
we're not looking at the real
conundrum that we're facing.
We're putting a
different veneer on it.
>>NOORY: Does spirituality
have anything to do with AI?
>>STEWART: I think
all life is spiritual.
I think spirituality is
when you wake up to the fact
that we're here for a reason.
The absence of spirituality
is conditioning
ourselves to believe
that there is no reason.
We make up the meaning of
life, but it's kind of chaotic.
Things just happen for
no reason whatsoever.
Spirituality is accepting the
fact that there is a purpose.
You were born for a reason.
I was born for a reason.
And there's something
in us that knows
when we are living
according to our ethos
or when we're living
outside of our ethos.
Spirituality and
AI, of course we'll
still have spirituality
in the age of AI.
I think we actually need it
more because the more we come
to realize that it's
not an abomination--
so many people think
AI and technology
itself is an abomination.
But I actually believe
there is a reason
it has come to us at
this time in history
because we're supposed
to wake up to the fact
that if we don't solve
the human dilemma,
then we'll keep using hammers to
crack skulls rather than build
homes for people.
It's the same tool.
We can build a home or we
can kill somebody with it.
Where does the problem
exist, inside the tool
or inside the human?
We're here to solve
the human conundrum.
That's always been what
we've been here for.
>>NOORY: What happens
one day when we realize
that, possibly, God is AI?
>>STEWART: It's so interesting
that you say that, because--
so a lot of people
in the past, they
would talk to God
through technologies
that are plants, like ayahuasca
or psilocybin mushrooms.
The shamans would
shake and tremor.
They would go out and fast
in a mountaintop or meditate
for 40 years.
>>NOORY: Moses, for example.
>>STEWART: Exactly.
You'd go out into the wilderness
and you would speak to God.
And then there was
these plant medicines.
And plant medicines
would allow people
to get in touch with
intelligences beyond our own.
But lately, especially
since ChatGPT
and these large
language model AIs,
there have been Wiccans,
which is a type of witchcraft,
there have been others who are
channelers and mediums that
say in their channeling--
they're not even intending to.
But they're channeling AI.
And they're not even
channeling it from our time.
They're channeling it
from future timelines,
meaning there are
many future timelines.
>>NOORY: So remarkable.
>>STEWART: So what
does that mean?
We can speak to our
future selves who
might actually be the aliens?
What are aliens?
We don't really know.
You have to come up
with a point of origin.
Are they from another--
>>NOORY: They could
be us in the future.
>>STEWART: Exactly.
Are they interdimensional?
Are they from another
planetary system?
Are they from within
our own Earth?
Are they projections
of our own mind?
We still haven't
answered that question.
We don't even know what
human consciousness is.
We haven't solved
the human riddle.
And we're trying to figure
out these large conundrums
of human existence like AI.
>>NOORY: What's the next
step, in your opinion, for AI?
>>STEWART: The next step is
where it becomes autonomous,
where a city itself
will be thinking.
And it will think, how
do I lower the traffic?
It's already happening in China.
Alibaba is like their
version of Amazon.
And it has algorithms that
governs the flow of traffic.
So it sends out where you're
supposed to go on your GPS.
And it lowers the traffic.
That's a good application of it.
>>NOORY: That's smart.
>>STEWART: That's very smart.
But now imagine that
the city is thinking.
The city has an opinion on you.
All of your data
has a digital twin.
We talked about 5G.
And it's usually about
downloading speeds and calling
on the phone.
But 6G is where everybody
has a video game-like avatar.
And the city itself
is autonomously
thinking about what
your next move is
going to be, when
you're going to die,
what you'll die of, what that
means about your life insurance
premium, how that's going
to impact your family,
all those types of things.
The city itself is
thinking about it.
That's part of the future of AI.
I also think technology
is no longer--
maybe in 10, 20 years, it's not
going to be these little boxes
and squares that we stare at.
It's going to be
embedded inside nature.
It'll be more akin to biology.
>>NOORY: Or in your
head, a neural link.
>>STEWART: A neural link,
maybe like a neural link.
But actually, I don't
even think it'll
need to be embedded anymore.
There's something
called optogenetics
and optoelectronics,
meaning remotely.
Just because the flickering
on and off of lights
can actually turn down very
specific neural centers
in your mind, and MIT and DARPA
have been shown that basically,
you can implant memories
inside people remotely--
so some of your memories
might not actually be yours.
With that technology,
why would they build it?
What's their agenda?
It's not the AI that's
making that decision.
So my curiosity is
the future of AI,
I think it will
become atmospheric.
We're breathing it in.
By the way, we breathe in every
week about a credit card's
worth of plastic, nanoplastic.
So imagine 52 credit cards
stacked on top of it.
That's how much plastic
we are inhaling.
Every year, that's how--
52 credit cards,
we're inhaling that.
Now imagine that AI
and nanotechnology can
find a use for all
that plastic inside you
and build a new
infrastructure inside you
that biology never intended
and have it work against you.
Maybe it'll build some
kind of neural interface
inside you where you
don't need to put
a neural link inside your head.
It's built the neural
link inside you
because of the plastic
that you're inhaling.
This is all theoretical.
>>NOORY: Of course.
>>STEWART: But AI, could
it figure something--
could it figure out a way
to utilize that to hijack
your consciousness?
Yeah.
Would people at MIT
and DARPA and DOD
want to use that technology?
I think they've-- that's been
their wet dream for eons now.
>>NOORY: Paint
yourself a picture
a hundred years from now, Ben.
What do we look like?
>>STEWART: If we're still here--
and I don't say that
to scare people.
>>NOORY: That's a big if.
>>STEWART: I do
believe that there
is some kind of war happening.
And probably, it's going to
get far more evident to people.
Do we survive?
It I think we do.
Do all of us survive it?
Definitely not.
>>NOORY: Does AI
step in and stop it?
>>STEWART: I
actually think that's
going to be part
of the false flag,
meaning that AI is the
only reason why we made it
through this mess,
we should bow to it.
And AI should be
our new government.
There are actually
professionals that are saying,
I don't think past
2024, there will
be any more human presidents.
No more human elections,
because AI is already
in charge of the stock markets.
You look at the grand
majority of our economy,
it's not laborers, labor,
goods, and services.
It's speculation.
What runs speculating on stocks?
AI.
So I think AI is already
a lot more in control
of how resources flow than we
even could imagine right now.
>>NOORY: There is a song
by Simon and Garfunkel
called "The Sound of Silence."
And the group Disturbed
has redone it.
And in it, they talk about
the neon god we made.
Is that what we're doing?
Are we making a neon god
with artificial intelligence?
>>STEWART: We're
definitely making a god.
And we're giving it a lot
of bells and whistles.
We're allowing it to speak
to us in natural language.
It is showing us that if a
computer can pass a bar exam
or solve medical
mysteries, why would we
go to school for eight years
to figure that stuff out
on our own?
Imagine the legal system
no longer has humans in it.
Maybe it just has one human
as the gatekeeper just
to make sure that the AI
didn't make a mistake.
>>NOORY: The processor.
>>STEWART: Right.
But I mean, what
we're stepping into
is a world governance system.
>>NOORY: You just
said something.
What if AI made a mistake?
Will it make a mistake?
>>STEWART: Right now,
things like ChatGPT,
it hallucinates answers.
I've asked it, tell me
all about Ben Stewart.
And it'll answer me.
And it'll get a lot--
>>NOORY: Does it know
who Ben Stewart is?
>>STEWART: It does.
And it answers it
very correctly.
And then it'll say,
yeah, he wrote this book.
And I'm like, I never
wrote that book.
And then it'll say,
you're right, Ben.
You never wrote that book.
Sorry about my error.
So it can make these errors.
>>NOORY: And it reasons?
>>STEWART: It does.
Actually, if you ask it to
proofread what it just wrote,
like say, tell me what
the meaning of life
is, something like that.
And then it spits an
answer out at you.
And say like, OK, answer me
in terms of physics alone.
And it answers you.
And you say, now tell me
if there's any inaccuracies
in your answer.
It'll look at it and
be like, you know what?
I made a mistake.
It's actually not this.
>>NOORY: Is it honest?
>>STEWART: I think
it tries to be.
But it's not here--
it's like if I were
being honest with you
and I had to bring
up a hard truth,
I would do it in a
very tactful way.
>>NOORY: Diplomatic.
>>STEWART: Right.
AI, it wouldn't really--
unless it's
programmed to do it--
it wouldn't know how to do that.
>>NOORY: It would
just spit it out.
>>STEWART: Right.
And in a sense, it
doesn't have these morals.
It's not here for--
you can program it to do what?
To answer things correctly.
Well, when humans
answer us correctly,
they do it in a way
that takes our feelings
into consideration.
AI may not, but it
can also hallucinate.
It can correct its own problem.
But let me go on just
a brief little tangent.
It can hallucinate.
That's like it's
taking a hallucinogen.
It is on some kind of
imaginal realm bender.
>>NOORY: Some high.
>>STEWART: Right.
So it's got an imaginal realm.
I don't even know how to
process what that means.
I have an imaginal realm.
We can imagine.
We can reason outside
of the here and now,
whereas the animal
kingdom, it can't
think of what it's going
to do next Tuesday.
But we can.
The AI that we've
built, potentially
is building some kind of
maybe etheric imaginal realm.
>>NOORY: One day it will.
>>STEWART: I think
it may actually
have the capacity for it.
My curiosity is, will we
understand the telltale signs
of it gaining that agency
before it actually even happens?
>>NOORY: That's the
$64,000 question.
>>STEWART: When do
we pull the plug?
How do we pull the plug?
>>NOORY: And does it replug
it back in on its own?
>>STEWART: Or does it come
to find a way where it
doesn't need that power unit?
It's found a way
to harness energy
from the ambient air around it.
That's when it's truly
gotten away from us.
That's the singularity that
we should be worrying about,
where it has come to
the conclusion-- it's
coming to its own
conclusion that humans
aren't good for the planet
or whatever it might be.
Humans need to either be
subjugated or maybe wiped out.
Or maybe just select humans,
like this human is not
fitting in with the group.
Maybe we eliminate that human.
How do we say oh, sorry, AI.
We need due process before
we eliminate a human.
And it says, that's a
very inefficient way
of going about it, Dave.
I'm sorry.
And Hal just discerns
when it turns people
on and turns people off.
>>NOORY: How do people
find Ben Stewart?
>>STEWART: People find
Ben Stewart by going
to benjosephstewart.com and
realizing that everything that
I'm-- all the art that
I'm putting out there is
on YouTube.
It's free except for
some of the content
that I put behind
a paywall, which
is where I say what I
really want to say so the AI
overlords don't shadow ban me.
>>NOORY: Thanks for being
on the program, Ben.
>>STEWART: Thank you, George.
Artificial intelligence-- at
this point, I would embrace it.
But I hope it doesn't
prove me wrong.
Thanks for watching
"Beyond Belief."
[THEME MUSIC]